



Transport Area Working Group                                   J. Morton
Internet-Draft                                           Bufferbloat.net
Updates: 3168, 8289, 8290, 8033, 8034                           D. Taeht
         (if approved)                                          TekLibre
Intended status: Standards Track                           March 9, 2019
Expires: September 10, 2019


                Adapting AQMs to use SCE bit transitions
                        draft-morton-taht-SCE-00

Abstract

   This memo reclassifies ECT(0) to be an early notification of
   congestion on ECT(1) marked packets, which can be used by AQM
   algorithms and transports as an earlier signal of congestion than
   CE.. It is transparent, backward compatible upgrade to the existing

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 10, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Morton & Taeht         Expires September 10, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    scebt                       March 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Generating SCE in AQMs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Generating SCE in AQMs

   A guide to generating useful fine-grained congestion signals in the
   network, by adapting existing AQM algorithms to support SCE as well
   as CE marking in ECN.

   ------------------------------------------------------------

   The first document in this series introduces the SCE (Some Congestion
   Experienced) codepoint of the ECN field in the IP header, which
   replaces the otherwise unused ECT(1) codepoint.  The ubiquitous
   ECT(0) codepoint is simply renamed ECT, and the existing CE and Not-
   ECT codepoints also retain their existing meanings.

   SCE markings are treated identically to ECT by existing RFC-compliant
   transports, and are thus transparently backwards compatible.

   SCE-aware transports, however, MAY interpret varying proportions of
   SCE marking as indicating varying levels of congestion, and can
   evolve their send rates to avoid the harsher response required by a
   CE mark, which should be interpreted as signalling more serious
   congestion.  Ideally, this should result in smoother and more
   accurate control of send rates to match the actual bottleneck
   bandwidth with minimal induced delay.

   Existing AQMs are able to mark CE on both ECT and SCE marked packets,
   and this will continue with SCE-aware AQMs.  An SCE marked packet
   MUST NOT be changed back to ECT, and likewise a CE marked packet MUST
   NOT be changed downward to SCE or ECT; these actions would erase
   congestion information from earlier in the path.

   Permitted ECN codepoint replacements by middleboxes:

   Not-ECT -> ECT or DROP ECT -> ECT or SCE or CE SCE -> SCE or CE or
   DROP CE -> CE or DROP

   Broadly, AQMs can be categorised as being RED-like (signalling on
   some proportion of packets) or Codel-like (signalling at some
   frequency over time).  Signalling here means dropping Not-ECT packets




Morton & Taeht         Expires September 10, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    scebt                       March 2019


   or marking ECT packets with CE; the ECN RFC advocates treating both
   as identical.

   Codel-like AQMs rely on the specification of TCP to perform a
   Multiplicative Decrease upon receiving even a single congestion
   signal (lost packet or CE mark) per RTT.  RED-like AQMs, such as PIE,
   assume less about the character of the traffic and can effectively
   control latency even for unresponsive traffic, but at the expense of
   generally higher packet loss.

   Another important dimension of AQM classification is between single
   queue (flow blind) and multiqueue (flow aware) AQMs.  Some of the
   latter implement both an independent queue of packets and an
   independent AQM instance per identified flow, while others only
   provide an independent or pseudo-independent AQM per flow.  SCE is
   likely to work best with flow-aware AQMs, as it changes the AIMD
   behaviour of TCP that flow-blind AQMs implicitly rely on in flow-
   fairness arguments.

   However, any AQM (or even a dumb FIFO) can implement SCE at the most
   basic level by choosing a hard threshold of queue depth,
   corresponding to (say) one millisecond of induced delay or one full
   MTU or aggregate in the queue (whichever is greater), and marking all
   ECT packets as SCE if the instantaneous queue depth is above that
   threshold, but none otherwise.  Though highly simplistic, the
   relatively gentle response of transports to SCE makes this basic
   strategy likely to improve on basic AQM behaviour.

   RED-like AQMs may implement SCE by adding a second stochastic marking
   function alongside the main one, activating at lower queue depths or
   as the lower half of a biphase control function.  This should be
   arranged so that high levels of SCE marking (greater than 80%)
   reliably occur before CE marking begins.  This maximises the
   likelihood that an SCE-aware transport can avoid the throughput
   penalty associated with a Multiplicative Decrease, by making
   relatively small adjustments to its send rate strategy.

   Codel-like AQMs may directly convert the measured queue sojourn time
   into an SCE marking rate, either using a continuously-variable
   stochastic method, or a series of fixed marking patterns with defined
   activation thresholds (effectively implementing a stepped function).
   The "target" sojourn time, which Codel treats as the maximum
   tolerable level of persistent queue, should trigger 100% SCE marking;
   hence any CE mark will be surrounded by SCEs rather than ECTs.  Lower
   ranges of sojourn time may be represented by 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2
   patterns of SCE and ECT.





Morton & Taeht         Expires September 10, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    scebt                       March 2019


   In general, AQMs should aim to provide 50% (or 1:1 ratio) SCE marking
   at the desired operating point of the queue, which should be at 100%
   link throughput and the minimum sustainable queue depth.  The
   threshold for dropping packets or applying CE marks MUST be somewhat
   higher than this, to compensate for the wide oscillations in send
   rate that these stronger signals induce in typical transports.

   Intuitively, an empty queue (inducing no delay to packets passing
   through it) should not result in SCE marks.  However, there is an
   argument for detecting incipient congestion through comparing actual
   throughput to link capacity, and signalling this through a low rate
   of SCE marking (from 25% or 1:3 downward).  Low SCE rates do not
   prevent the transport from growing its send rate to match remaining
   capacity, but by reducing that growth rate, may help to prevent
   overshooting the ideal send rate and building a queue.  In control
   theory, this is the function of the D section of a PID controller.

   In particular, research into TCP congestion control has long sought a
   reliable method for determining when to exit the exponential-growth
   slow-start phase.  Since the standard for TCP slow-start is a
   doubling of growth per RTT, the correct time to begin low-rate SCE
   signalling is when throughput reaches 50% of link capacity; this
   ensures that the signal to exit slow-start reaches the sender just as
   its send rate reaches capacity.

   Examining the raw link throughput is sufficient for flow-blind AQMs,
   but flow-aware AQMs should also avoid signalling congestion
   unnecessarily to flows using less than their fair share of the link.
   The details of this will necessarily vary with the precise mechanism
   used to implement flow-awareness.

   For the DRR++ scheme used by fq_codel and Cake, which classifies
   flows as either "bulk" or "sparse", it should be sufficient to
   suppress SCE marking for "sparse" flows.  A global state may be used
   to determine the capacity-marking rate for bulk flows, but if a
   deterministic pattern of marking is employed, the pattern should be
   maintained independently per queue, to ensure that the correct ratio
   of marks is seen by each flow even if the number of active flows is
   not relatively prime to the pattern length.

Authors' Addresses










Morton & Taeht         Expires September 10, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    scebt                       March 2019


   Jonathon Morton
   Bufferbloat.net
   PO Box
   San Francisco, Ca  94117
   USA

   Phone: +1
   Email: chromatix99@gmail.com


   David M. Taeht
   TekLibre
   20600 Aldercroft Heights Rd
   Los Gatos, Ca  95033
   USA

   Phone: +18312059740
   Email: dave@taht.net

































Morton & Taeht         Expires September 10, 2019               [Page 5]
